---
title: "Pasture BMP effectiveness using an HRU-based subarea approach in SWAT"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2015-12-01-SWATBMP-sinnathambyetal
excerpt: 'This study develop and demonstrate a method to evaluate water-quality impacts and the effectiveness of two widely used BMPs on a livestock pasture: off-stream watering site and stream fencing.'
date: 2015-12-01
venue: 'Journal of Environmental Management '
paperurl: 'https://www.researchgate.net/publication/283291308_Pasture_BMP_effectiveness_using_an_HRU-based_subarea_approach_in_SWAT'
citation: 'Sheshukov A.Y., K.R. Douglas-Mankin, S. Sinnathamby, P. Daggupati. (2015). &quot;Pasture BMP effectiveness using an HRU-based subarea approach in SWAT.&quot; <i>Journal of Environmental Management </i>. 166(2016).'
---
Abstract: Many conservation programs have been established to motivate producers to adopt best management practices (BMP) to minimize pasture runoff and nutrient loads, but a process is needed to assess BMP effectiveness to help target implementation efforts. A study was conducted to develop and demonstrate a method to evaluate water-quality impacts and the effectiveness of two widely used BMPs on a livestock pasture: off-stream watering site and stream fencing. The Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT) model was built for the Pottawatomie Creek Watershed in eastern Kansas, independently calibrated at the watershed outlet for streamflow and at a pasture site for nutrients and sediment runoff, and also employed to simulate pollutant loads in a synthetic pasture. The pasture was divided into several subareas including stream, riparian zone, and two grazing zones. Five scenarios applied to both a synthetic pasture and a whole watershed were simulated to assess various combinations of widely used pasture BMPs: (1) baseline conditions with an open stream access, (2) an off-stream watering site installed in individual subareas in the pasture, and (3) stream or riparian zone fencing with an off-stream watering site. Results indicated that pollutant loads increase with increasing stocking rates whereas off-stream watering site and/or stream fencing reduce time cattle spend in the stream and nutrient loads. These two BMPs lowered organic P and N loads by more than 59% and nitrate loads by 19%, but TSS and sediment-attached P loads remained practically unchanged. An effectiveness index (EI) quantified impacts from the various combinations of off-stream watering sites and fencing in all scenarios. Stream bank contribution to pollutant loads was not accounted in the methodology due to limitations of the SWAT model but can be incorporated in the approach if an amount of bank soil loss is known for various stocking rates. The proposed methodology provides an adaptable framework for pasture BMP assessment and was utilized to represent a consistent, defensible process to quantify the effectiveness of BMP proposals in a BMP auction in eastern Kansas.


[Download paper here](http://SumathyS.github.io/files/paper3.pdf)
