---
title: "A unified approach for protecting listed species and ecosystem services in isolated wetlands using community-level protection goals"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2019-01-01-conservingisolatedwetlands-sinnathambyetal
excerpt: 'This study explore a new strategy for protecting isolated wetlands and habitats.'
date: 2019-01-01
venue: 'Science of the Total Environment'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.01.153'
citation: 'Raimondo,S., Sharpe,L., Oliver,L., McCaffrey,K.R., Purucker,S,T., Sinnathamby,S., and J. M. Minucci. (2019).&quot; A unified approach for protecting listed species and ecosystem services in isolated wetlands using community-level protection goals.&quot; <i> Science of The Total Environment</i>. 11(1). 
'Sinnathamby, S., K.R. Douglas-Mankin, M.E. Muche, S.L. Hutchinson and A. Aavudai. (2018). Ecohydrological index, native fish, and climate trends and relationships in the Kansas River basin.Ecohydrology.'
---
Abstract: The protection of listed species through the Ecological Risk Assessment (ERA) process is encumbered by the number and diversity of species that need protection and the limited data available to inform assessments. Ecological communities within isolated ecosystems often contain a number of biologically diverse endemic, endangered, and threatened species, as well as providing numerous ecosystem services (ES). We propose an approach that develops community-level protection goals using isolated wetlands that includes both listed species and Service Providing Units (SPUs) that drive ES for ecological risk assessments (ERAs). Community-level protection goals are achieved by developing a protection community and weighing lines of evidence to determine a set of focal species within that community upon which to base the assessment. Lines of evidence include chemical mechanism of action, likely routes of exposure, and taxa susceptibility, as well as relationships among species, and other ecological factors. We demonstrate the process using case studies of chlorpyrifos in California vernal pools and coal ash effluent in Carolina bays. In the California vernal pool case study, listed species were the primary SPUs for the ES provided by the critical habitat. The weight of evidence demonstrated the honey bee as the focal species for the terrestrial environment and the vernal pool fairy shrimp as the focal species for the aquatic environment. The protection community within the Carolina bay case study was more taxonomically diverse than vernal pools for both listed species and SPUs, with amphibians identified as the focal species for which to target mitigation goals and hazard levels. The approach presented here will reduce the time and resource investment required for assessment of risk to listed species and adds an ES perspective to demonstrate value of assessments beyond listed species concerns..
[Download paper here](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.01.153)